Light causes damage to objects in museums. To minimise damage museums limit light levels as much as possible whilst maintaining a pleasant-enough visitor experience.
Another way that museums could reduce potential damage to objects would be to use lights with a lower Correlated Colour Temperature (CCT) because these contain a higher proportion of longer wavelengths, which are generally less damaging.
This approach is not often used, principally because of a belief that changing the CCT in an environment will affect the visual experience.
Models of vision suggest such a change should not affect visual experience; that we should be able to adapt to any colour of lighting. This seems true to an extent but it seems as though we prefer some colours over others, and we don't fully understand why this is. Historically, experiments seeking to find a preferred CCT provide conflicting results.
One possible reason for these conflicting results might be if iprgcs were involved in colour constancy, and there are various reasons to suggest that they might be. Since this cell group has only been known of in recent years, colour constancy experiments generally haven't controlled for iprgc activation.
Initially, we performed two lab-based psychophysical experiments to examine the effect of varying iprgc activation on an observer's state of colour constancy. These did not provide evidence for a simple or strong effect of iprgc activation. (TABLET!!)
Following this we adopted a wider perspective and tried to ask the question of whether such a signal could theoretically be useful, considering the natural environment and the challenge posed by varying lighting conditions where the goal is a colour appearance related to object identity.
The overall goal of this excercise is to increase our understanding of colour constancy so that we can advise museums on how to reduce damage to objects without degrading visitor experience. Additionally, the furthering of fundamental vision science, and more general lighting engineering. (!!!!!)