Light causes damage to objects in museums. To limit this type of damage, museums normally filter out and ultraviolet radiation from any illumination, and reduce light levels to those proposed in various guidance documents. These levels are proposed as being the lowest possible light levels that still provide a useful and pleasant visual experience.
Another way that museums could reduce potential damage to objects would be to use lights with a lower 'correlated colour temperature' (CCT) because these contain a high proportion of longer wavelengths, which are generally less damaging to objects.
This approach is not often used, at least in part because of a belief that changing the CCT in an environment will affect the visual experience.
Models of vision suggest such a change in CCT alone should not affect visual experience; that we should be able to adapt to any colour of lighting. This seems true to an extent but it seems as though we prefer some colours over others, and we don't fully understand why this is. Historically, experiments seeking to find a preferred CCT have provided conflicting results.
One possible reason for these conflicting results might be if a cell group called the 'intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells' (ipRGCs) were involved in colour constancy, and there are various reasons to suggest that they might be. Since this cell group has only been known of in recent years, colour constancy experiments generally haven't controlled for ipRGC activation.
Initially, we performed two lab-based psychophysical experiments to examine the effect of varying ipRGC activation on an observer's state of colour constancy. These did not provide evidence for a simple or strong effect of ipRGC activation. Additionally, we developed a method for performing color constancy experiments outside of the lab environment, quickly and with naive observers.
Following this we adapted our approach. Instead of asking what the affect of varying ipRGC activation was, we asked instead whether a signal originating from the ipRGCs could hypothetically be of value, considering the natural environment and the challenge posed by varying lighting conditions, where the goal is colour appearance which related primarily to object identity.
The applied goal of this research is to increase our understanding of color constancy so that we can advise museums on how to reduce damage to objects without degrading visitor experience. Asking whether ipRGCs play a role in color constancy is additionally valuable to the vision science community, and to lighting engineering beyond the museum world.